[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the IBM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: It's nine o'clock on a Saturday, the regular crowd shuffles in.
[Amit Varma]: There's a babu sitting next to me, from the excise department of sin.
[Amit Varma]: He says, son, can you give me a bribe, please?
[Amit Varma]: I'm not really sure what it's for.
[Amit Varma]: There are so many rules that I use as my tools.
[Amit Varma]: Pay me up if you don't want a war.
[Amit Varma]: La, la la, di di da, la la, di di da, da dum.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a bribe, you're the restaurant man.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a bribe, tonight, we're all in the mood for some chai pani, and you've got me
[Unknown]: feeling all right.
[Amit Varma]: Now you might think you can get away, if you simply follow the law.
[Amit Varma]: Let me light up your joint, because you're missing the point.
[Amit Varma]: While I'm at it, let me break your jaw.
[Amit Varma]: Our laws, you see, are contradictory, there's simply no way to comply.
[Amit Varma]: All regulation is just exploitation of my power to bleed you dry.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a bribe, you're the restaurant man.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a bribe, tonight, we're all in the mood for some chai pani, and you've got me
[Amit Varma]: feeling all right.
[Amit Varma]: You've got me feeling all right.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, I'm Amit Verma, and my subject for today is restaurant
[Amit Varma]: regulations.
[Amit Varma]: All regulations have great intentions, but many often have terrible outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: Restaurant regulations are a great example of this.
[Amit Varma]: There are many of them, some of them contradict each other, and they're basically just enablers
[Amit Varma]: of rent-seeking.
[Amit Varma]: That is, they're nothing more than an instrument for government inspectors to extract bribes
[Amit Varma]: or hafta out of you.
[Amit Varma]: To discuss this subject with me, I have in the studio a close friend of mine, Madhu Menon.
[Amit Varma]: Madhu ran a great restaurant in Bangalore called Shiok for seven years, and is a well-known
[Amit Varma]: restaurant consultant today.
[Amit Varma]: He's experienced restaurant regulations firsthand, and I couldn't think of anyone better to talk
[Amit Varma]: about the subject.
[Amit Varma]: Madhu, welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Madhu, you ran one of my favourite restaurants called Shiok in Bangalore for seven years,
[Amit Varma]: and I really enjoyed eating there, especially your infamous blogger's beef.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me, what was your experience with government regulations in all these years?
[Guest]: First of all, Amit, I don't want you to get me in trouble for mentioning international
[Guest]: dishes like beef.
[Guest]: But yes, that was a good dish, and I made it just for bloggers, so hey.
[Guest]: I know a lot of people think that restaurants are all about serving good food, and of course
[Guest]: that was my favourite part in the kitchen, but a major chunk of my time was actually
[Guest]: spent being compliant with government regulations, of which there's plenty, and there are lots
[Guest]: of departments, some you don't hear of until they come knocking on your door.
[Guest]: You have departments like the police, the labour department, the BBMB, which is the
[Guest]: municipal corporation, fire requirements, and a whole lot more.
[Guest]: And all of these have licences that need to be renewed, all of them have inspections that
[Guest]: can happen at any time.
[Guest]: So yeah, there were a lot of compliance issues from time to time, and not because we weren't
[Guest]: compliant with the rules, it was just that some of them were so vague that it was completely
[Guest]: left to the interpretation of the official in charge.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, in all the time that I've known you, and I first met you when you
[Amit Varma]: were actually running your restaurant, and you were obsessive about giving your customers
[Amit Varma]: the best service and the best value for money that they could get, and you had so many loyal
[Amit Varma]: customers and it was a great restaurant.
[Amit Varma]: So you already had all the incentives you need to deliver on all those fronts.
[Amit Varma]: Now one would imagine that government regulations, why are they needed then?
[Guest]: You know you're right, the best way to ensure that a restaurant keeps running is to make
[Guest]: sure that customers come back.
[Guest]: And the only way you'll do that is if your food is served in a hygienic fashion by service
[Guest]: staff who know what they're doing, and the food of course has to be good quality.
[Guest]: I think a lot of the regulations, the scene effect, it's noble intent that you comply
[Guest]: with safety standards, that you comply with business standards, that you're not running
[Guest]: an illegal business, and that someone has actually signed off on all the checks and
[Guest]: measures for you to make that happen.
[Guest]: But that's just the scene effect.
[Guest]: What are the unseen effects?
[Guest]: The unseen effects unfortunately in this country is that laws are written to be very vague
[Guest]: often.
[Guest]: They're often left to the interpretation of the officials themselves.
[Guest]: And there are lots of incentives for them to actually come knocking on your door, rent
[Guest]: seeking really, and or maybe grease bombs and find some flaw that you seemingly have
[Guest]: overlooked but is such a trivial issue.
[Guest]: Or it's actually not an issue at all.
[Guest]: It's just that someone's made it up and made it out to be an issue.
[Amit Varma]: So Madhu, can you give me some examples of specific regulations and the unseen effects
[Guest]: that they had?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Let me explain to you something that's very close to my heart and that's making cocktails.
[Guest]: Now we can all agree that someone who serves spurious liquor is actively involved in harming
[Guest]: other people.
[Guest]: So you want to prevent adulteration of alcohol, a noble intent.
[Guest]: But when you put in a rule saying that all alcohol must be pure and not adulterated,
[Guest]: you also introduce the possibility of interpretation and that interpretation sometimes that a cocktail
[Guest]: is adulteration.
[Guest]: Now that's ridiculous.
[Guest]: Or say a chef tries to be a little more creative and he decides to make a gin that's infused
[Guest]: with a few herbs and spices.
[Guest]: That can be adulteration and that's ridiculous again.
[Guest]: So what do you do?
[Guest]: It's completely up to the excise inspector to come along and if he says this is adulteration
[Guest]: then well he can fine you and that fine can be an arbitrary amount or he can say that
[Guest]: you have to cease operation and you have to then negotiate with him on how to get back.
[Amit Varma]: Can you appeal against these decisions or are you appealing to him himself?
[Guest]: That's the thing.
[Guest]: You can appeal but your appeal is heard by the same person who's actually fining you.
[Guest]: That should be fine.
[Guest]: Or you have to take it to court.
[Guest]: Now imagine what happens to a restaurant if you had a shutdown for a couple of months
[Guest]: and appeal a certain issue like your alcohol is adulterated or that 30 ml of your stock
[Guest]: was missing.
[Guest]: These kind of things they create a perverse incentive for inspectors to come and harass
[Guest]: you basically.
[Guest]: So many of our laws the effect is that most officials just come around knocking on your
[Guest]: door to make a little extra money and if they feel like they're short of cash on a particular
[Guest]: month they can just come by and say hey look you're violating this law or that law and
[Guest]: hey here's a fine and you eventually end up negotiating and settling for a smaller amount
[Guest]: and people think okay hey this is part of doing business but look what happens you know
[Guest]: all these bribes monthly payouts that you have to do all the cost of compliance it's
[Guest]: a business cost and what happens in any business when there's a business cost it eventually
[Guest]: gets added to the cost of the product that you have so just imagine it this way hundred
[Guest]: rupees was the actual burger and the service that you're getting and 50 rupees is probably
[Guest]: the cost of doing business.
[Amit Varma]: So actually it's coming back to you.
[Guest]: So it's eventually just hurting the customers hurting businesses hurting profitability it
[Guest]: is hurting customers and it is creating a mess of paperwork that is simply not needed
[Guest]: most of the time.
[Amit Varma]: Now another aspect of this is like recently a friend of mine was talking about the shutdown
[Amit Varma]: of illegal slaughterhouses in UP and I told him that listen you know you're using the
[Amit Varma]: word illegal in a wrong way the fact of the matter is that pretty much every single business
[Amit Varma]: in India is illegal in technical terms in terms of compliance because the web of regulations
[Amit Varma]: is often so convoluted that certain regulations end up contradicting others.
[Amit Varma]: So if you comply with one you're automatically breaking another you have you have any experience
[Guest]: of that?
[Guest]: Absolutely I can tell you okay no one will argue that say a fire regulation is needed
[Guest]: right a fire safety is needed I won't say regulation let's say fire safety is needed
[Guest]: that's a given and now what happens if say your building catches fire you have an entrance
[Guest]: and say the entrance is blocked because of the fire.
[Guest]: Fire regulations say you need an emergency exit and no one's going to oppose that that's
[Guest]: a sensible regulation except that the excise law in Karnataka says you can only have one
[Guest]: entrance to the premises.
[Guest]: Why so that there is no pilferage or there is no introduction of alcohol through another
[Guest]: entrance and that only one entrance can be monitored.
[Guest]: Now what happens is that these two requirements are completely contradictory you cannot have
[Guest]: two entrances and have a liquor license.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore you end up giving a bribe to one or the other and probably both anyway
[Guest]: because that's pretty much it actually there's a monthly fee that goes out to the excise
[Guest]: office that is basically a way of telling them to look the other way because we all
[Guest]: know that this is going to happen this it's simply logically impossible to achieve.
[Amit Varma]: And some of the most absurd laws you know regarding restaurants are actually laws around
[Amit Varma]: alcohol because they also lend themselves to moralistic reasonings.
[Guest]: Yes, we're a funny nation.
[Guest]: The state has a moral obligation to prevent alcoholism and tries to do things so that
[Guest]: people don't get alcohol issues and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So they have restrictions like not issuing any bar licenses.
[Guest]: This is true in Karnataka since 1993 there have been no fresh bar license issued.
[Guest]: So basically if you want to start a bar you have to buy a bar license from someone who's
[Guest]: closing their bar which has resulted in the cost of bar licenses gradually going up to
[Guest]: more than a crore.
[Guest]: Imagine that that's the cost of acquiring a license from someone else who has it.
[Guest]: And unfortunately for state the largest revenue for state excise actually comes from alcohol.
[Guest]: So we have both no new bar licenses.
[Guest]: So what do they do?
[Guest]: They have no new licenses given and still keep alcohol sales going along.
[Guest]: So they introduce laws like short lifting which means that if you run a bar you have
[Guest]: to lift a minimum of 52 cases of alcohol every month.
[Guest]: To put in perspective 52 cases each case is 12 bottles of say vodka.
[Guest]: So that's 12 into 52 and that's the minimum you need to sell every month.
[Guest]: If you don't do that they penalize you.
[Guest]: So if you're a small restaurant or a medium sized restaurant that just wants to have a
[Guest]: bar on the side as a service to make it a fine dining restaurant it's a completely unviable
[Guest]: business model because the excise department penalizes you for it.
[Guest]: And instead of just giving out new licenses right they could have done that.
[Guest]: The population of Bangalore has more than doubled from 1991 and it's ridiculous that
[Amit Varma]: they're not giving out any fresh licenses.
[Amit Varma]: And the original rationale for limiting bar licenses was we'll have one bar per X number
[Guest]: of people and the population has more than doubled and they haven't.
[Guest]: It was meant to be a limited number of licenses per number of people and that formula even
[Guest]: that formula doesn't hold anymore.
[Guest]: So even their twisted rationale for having that and think about why they had that restriction
[Guest]: because if you had more than that you would encourage people to drink and like I said
[Guest]: earlier the state makes a lot of money from alcohol.
[Guest]: So these two are actually at odds with each other so they instead punish restaurants for
[Guest]: not having sold enough liquor.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me the regulation in the first place was a protectionist regulation.
[Amit Varma]: The interest groups behind it would have been existing bar license owners who would have
[Amit Varma]: wanted to restrict the competition and it's worked even better for them because not only
[Amit Varma]: have they restricted the competition the licenses have itself gone up so much in value.
[Guest]: Let me put that into perspective for you.
[Guest]: I started my restaurant in 2003 and at the time this rule was still in effect and I actually
[Guest]: bought the paper quote unquote as they say from another bar for about eight and a half
[Guest]: lakhs.
[Guest]: Of course I had to then pay a transference fee which is a government regulation and a
[Guest]: name change fee.
[Guest]: Again these are further avenues for making revenue both official and unofficial.
[Guest]: That eight and a half lakh figure has now crossed one crore, it's 1.2 crores last time
[Guest]: I checked and that keeps going every month it just keeps going up.
[Guest]: That's 2003 versus 2016.
[Guest]: So what is eight and a half lakhs then is 1.2 crores now.
[Guest]: So that's a straight up a capital in investment of 1.2 crores just to start a bar.
[Amit Varma]: And that's an artificial scarcity.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: There's no reason for having that.
[Amit Varma]: And when someone actually invests that kind of money in getting a bar license they have
[Amit Varma]: no option but to pass the cost on to the consumer.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So if I spend eight and a half lakhs to get a bar license whereas I spend 1.2 crores now
[Guest]: each drink of yours has that government tax added to it.
[Guest]: So if you want to complain about high prices of liquor or food in a bar you know why it's
[Amit Varma]: happening.
[Amit Varma]: And what then inevitably happens is that if the liquor at a bar is too expensive people
[Amit Varma]: who want liquor want it anyway they'll get it from elsewhere and there might be less
[Amit Varma]: safe sources you know and so on.
[Guest]: It creates incentives for people to create adulterated liquor for sure.
[Guest]: And that's how all these accidents happen.
[Guest]: People are buying it from illegal sources and people are dying and it's to me that's
[Guest]: disgusting.
[Amit Varma]: Now I read a few years ago that when the Four Seasons Hotel opened in Mumbai they had to
[Amit Varma]: get more than 250 licenses including separate licenses for the weighing scales in the kitchen
[Amit Varma]: and in the bedrooms which sounded completely crazy and which sounded just absolute rent
[Amit Varma]: seeking.
[Amit Varma]: You give a lot of discretion to the government and then each regulation they'll pull out
[Amit Varma]: that much from you.
[Amit Varma]: In terms of restaurants how bad is it and is it something that just gets worse and worse?
[Amit Varma]: Can it possibly get better because why would governments give up power?
[Guest]: That's true.
[Guest]: When you think about it right the idea of those weights and measures again noble thing
[Guest]: that it is from a certified source and that the merchant is not cheating anyone except
[Guest]: in your kitchen if you're on a restaurant you want those things anyway.
[Guest]: You want to make sure that a vendor coming in saying that he's giving you one kilogram
[Guest]: of broccoli is not giving you 900 grams.
[Amit Varma]: So you have to have those.
[Amit Varma]: The best incentives come from the marketplace themselves.
[Guest]: People are looking after their own self-interest.
[Guest]: And unless you're in turn selling broccoli by the kilo to customers which doesn't really
[Guest]: happen in restaurants you don't really need to worry about portions being weighed accurately
[Guest]: and sold.
[Guest]: So I don't understand it at all.
[Guest]: I don't expect the issue to get any better because it creates an entire ecosystem of
[Guest]: officials who are making money from bribes and middlemen who act as consultants to facilitate
[Guest]: inspections.
[Guest]: The government does suffer from a severe shortage of inspectors.
[Guest]: The labor department I think has less than 30 inspectors across the city and imagine
[Guest]: each business that needs a shops and establishment act license which is a labor license they
[Guest]: have to be inspected by these inspectors.
[Guest]: So can you just imagine each inspector going each person has to do but 40 to 50 inspections
[Guest]: a day.
[Guest]: That's not humanly possible.
[Guest]: So you might have to wait a few months for that to happen and your business can't run
[Guest]: without it.
[Guest]: They won't come and inspect unless your premises are ready.
[Guest]: You had to wait months for them to come around.
[Guest]: So what's the actual solution?
[Guest]: The only reasonable solution is to expedite the issue and that is you pay a little bit
[Guest]: of money.
[Guest]: They come around in three four days.
[Guest]: They inspect it.
[Guest]: I put quotes on around inspect because well sometimes you can get health inspectors to
[Guest]: come in and certify your premises without even having a kitchen ready because really
[Guest]: what else are you going to do?
[Guest]: So sure on paper they they've inspected the place and certify the place to say but that's
[Guest]: no guarantee of anything perversely the people who are most likely to benefit from this are
[Guest]: the dishonest businessmen.
[Guest]: You know if you want to take shortcuts you know you just pay a little more money and
[Guest]: someone comes and certifies without looking and hey it's fine you look the other way.
[Guest]: There's no proper drainage system.
[Guest]: Look the other way.
[Amit Varma]: Pay him another $50,000.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense I've even heard the argument that because of this web of regulations compliance
[Amit Varma]: is impossible and therefore thank God for corruption otherwise the system would grind
[Amit Varma]: to a halt.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: An efficient government is the worst kind of government.
[Guest]: We have actually redefined bribery.
[Guest]: Bribery used to be money you pay to get favors that were not usually possible.
[Guest]: In India bribery is something that you'd have to do to get things that you are owed anyway
[Guest]: which is just perverse to me.
[Amit Varma]: Which is crazy.
[Amit Varma]: I want to go back to something you said earlier on the show where you said that look if I'm
[Amit Varma]: selling a drink for a hundred bucks because of all the government regulations and the
[Amit Varma]: cost of compliance and so on that's 150 bucks I'm passing it on to the consumer which seems
[Amit Varma]: to me to be a massive cost to bear and I'm sure a lot of restaurants therefore at the
[Amit Varma]: margins either shut down or don't open in the first place purely because of the heavy
[Guest]: hand of government.
[Guest]: That's true Amit.
[Guest]: I want to actually point out an interesting free market angle to this you know demand
[Guest]: and supply like I mentioned earlier when you have a restriction on the number of licenses
[Guest]: that are given out and it's artificially limited so there is an increase in demand from restaurants
[Guest]: and bars that are starting up but there's only so many licenses when the economy booms
[Guest]: and there are more restaurants starting up an interesting free market and I use free
[Guest]: market ironically quote marks of course is that the cost of compliance also goes up in
[Guest]: that all the money that you have to give also the amounts keep going up because hey look
[Guest]: earlier there were 10 restaurants opening in a month now there are 50 everyone makes
[Guest]: a little extra money so it's demand and supply in the bribe market as well.
[Guest]: Madhu thank you so much for being on the show.
[Guest]: Thanks for having me Amit.
[Guest]: One more thing you should probably know and this will scare the living bejesus out of
[Guest]: everyone did you know this bit of trivia that the excise department has limits on the amount
[Guest]: of alcohol you can legally possess at home?
[Amit Varma]: Are you kidding me?
[Guest]: At my own personal home?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean again noble intent you know you can't run an alcohol business from home and guess
[Guest]: how much that liquor amount actually is in Karnataka that is just 2.3 liters of whiskey
[Guest]: vodka rum brandy or gin that means if you have four bottles of liquor sitting at home
[Guest]: which almost anyone with a well stocked bar has you are legally breaking the law.
[Amit Varma]: So if you have four bottles of vodka at home you are breaking the law?
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Madhu I am staying with you right now and I have looked inside your wine closet and
[Amit Varma]: you know something we need to get back home right now and do some serious drinking to
[Guest]: make you a law abiding citizen.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Let's do this.
[Guest]: It's 5 o'clock somewhere in the world.
[Amit Varma]: Let's start drinking now.
[Amit Varma]: In this whole ecosystem of rules and regulations meant purely for the extraction of bribes
[Amit Varma]: there are two unseen effects 1. the high cost of compliance is passed on to customers and
[Amit Varma]: are more expensive as a result 2. many restaurants that would otherwise be marginally profitable
[Amit Varma]: don't exist at all and this robs us of choice.
[Amit Varma]: All in all the people who suffer are the consumers which is usually the case with most regulation
[Amit Varma]: on business.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed this episode do hop over to the online magazine I edit Pragati at ThinkPragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and search for an article written by Madhu named No Tomato Left Behind.
[Amit Varma]: You can also follow Madhu on twitter at Madmanweb.
[Amit Varma]: Besides being a celebrity chef and a restaurant consultant he also does magnificent food and
[Amit Varma]: portrait photography.
[Amit Varma]: Check out his site BigShotPhoto.in.
[Amit Varma]: Also if you liked the introduction of this show the guitar was played by my intrepid
[Amit Varma]: producer Josh Thomas.
[Amit Varma]: We'll do more such stuff in the weeks to come.
[Amit Varma]: Till next week then bye bye.
[Unknown]: Next week on the seen and the unseen Amit Verma will be talking to Vivek Kaul about
[Unknown]: right to education or RTE.
[Unknown]: For more go to seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the seen and the unseen check out another show by IVM podcast
[Amit Varma]: Symbolified which is hosted by my good friends Naren, Chuck and Sriket.
[Unknown]: You can download it on any podcasting network.